RFD for official SELinux policy for SSH agents (#52529)
gravitational/teleport: rfd/0194-selinux-policy.md

can help prevent privilege escalation and lateral movement, provide peace of mind, and comply with security standards. As agents are the most widely
deployed component of Teleport, it is important to ensure that they are secure and compliant.

Only SSH agents are initially in scope for this proposal as a starting point, but the SELinux policy may be extended to other components of Teleport in the future.

## Details

### SELinux Policy Structure

SSH agents need a lot of privileges to function properly. They need to bind to privileged ports, manage cgroups, create processes, and more.
When an SSH session is started, the SSH service will create 2 child processes to handle it: 

- An intermediary process that prepares another child process that will actually run the SSH session. Depending on what is configured, PAM contexts
may be created, users may be created, a shell will be created, the user and group will be changed if necessary, and so on.
- The intermediary process will then create the child session process, which only needs standard permissions of the host user that the SSH session
was created for.

> Additionally, the SSH agent may create a networking child process to handle X11 forwarding, port forwarding, and SSH Agent forwarding. This process is a child process of the intermediary process as well.

Author: It is but the immediate child of the SSH server is the intermediate process that then creates another child that actually preforms the networkings tasks as far as I can tell, is that incorrect?

> Additionally, the SSH agent may create a networking child process to handle X11 forwarding, port forwarding, and SSH Agent forwarding. This process is a child process of the intermediary process as well.

Reviewer: Not quite, that's only the case for the `teleport exec` command which launches a child exec/shell command.

For the networking command, the main SSH server process reexecs itself with `teleport networking`, which starts [the networking process](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/0212ee673014becb7ab43b2aad0dc0712b71cd12/lib/srv/reexec.go#L541). The networking process doesn't spawn any child processes, it just [handles networking requests directly](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/0212ee673014becb7ab43b2aad0dc0712b71cd12/lib/srv/reexec.go#L689-L744).

> 4 main SELinux domains will be created to ensure each process in the chain is granted only the necessary permissions: `teleport_ssh_agent`, `teleport_ssh_agent_intermediary`, `teleport_ssh_agent_session`, and `teleport_ssh_networking` respectively.

Author: Good call, I'll change this to `teleport_ssh_server`

Configurable file and port contexts will be created for the `teleport_ssh_agent` domain, and configurable file contexts
will be created for the `teleport_ssh_agent_intermediary` domain to allow those processes to bind to the necessary ports and read and write
to the necessary files, depending on the SSH agent configuration.

SELinux booleans will also be created that will allow selective enabling or disabling of groups of permissions, depending on what is enabled
in the Teleport agent configuration. 

> These include:

Reviewer: Do we also need to consider a policy for the service to read from it's own data directory, including the audit logs saved to disk before being emitted to the auth server? Do we need a policy for dialing, e.g. to connect to the auth server to send the audit logs (or other integrations the node may have with other services)?

It would be worthwhile to add a section (or link to some docs) about what types of actions exactly require an SELinux policy, so that it will get the proper consideration in future features.

- Reading `~/.tsh/environment` on the server before creating a session
    - Enabling this will allow the `teleport_ssh_agent_intermediary` domain to read `.tsh/environment` in all users' home directories
- Creation of host users and groups
    - Enabling this will allow the `teleport_ssh_agent` domain to call necessary binaries such as `useradd`, `usermod` and `groupadd`
- Enhanced session recording with BPF
   - Enabling this will allow the `teleport_ssh_agent` domain to create and manage BPF ring buffers, and load BPF programs

> - Creation of PAM contexts

Author: They shouldn't have to, I added a bit of info on this to the RFD. From reading the docs you linked it seems like we require the PAM module to be in a specific location, so that shouldn't be difficult to support arbitrary modules

>     - Enabline this will allow the `teleport_ssh_agent_intermediary` domain to `dlopen` the PAM library and call it's exported functions

Author: Thanks, this was removed anyway though

The SELinux policy will be created as a SELinux Reference Policy (refpolicy), to maximize readability and maintainability.

The main alternative is to use SELinux Common Intermediate Language (CIL) which bridges refpolicies and compiled binary policy files. CIL is extremely powerful but much more difficult to understand.

### Installation and updating

The policy source will be included in future Teleport release tarballs and packages.

When `teleport-update` updates and installs new agent versions, it will unpack and install the SELinux policy if SELinux is present on the host.

After the SELinux policy is installed, it will be configured by `teleport-update`. `teleport-update` will use the Teleport agent configuration
file to determine how to configure some of the tunable SELinux policy contexts, such as port numbers, file paths, and booleans using the `semanage` tool.

If the configuration file cannot be found, the default configuration file wil be used to configure the SELinux policy instead.

A `configure-selinux` subcommand will be added to the `teleport-update` binary to allow users to reconfigure the SELinux policy when they change an

> SSH agent's configuration.

Author: Users will need to change the SELinux mode themselves, this is something usually done by administrators not by applications installing policies. It does need to be configured for each node/host. If the Teleport agent is able to change SELinux modes or update it's policy, then that severely weakens the strength of the SELinux policy in the first place, as a malicious attacker that gains control of the SSH service could disable SELinux or change the policy to be more permissive.

The SELinux mode will not be modified by the `teleport-update` if policies are installed, users will be responsible for enabling SELinux if they
so choose.

### Host support

Initially RHEL based distributions, primarily RHEL 7 and 8, and Rocky Linux 8 will be supported.
Other distributions such as Debian based distributions may be supported in the future.

### Security

This policy when installed and SELinux is set to the enforcing mode will only increase the security of Teleport SSH agents. The authenticity of
the policies contained in release assets served by the download server is out of scope for this RFD.

### Test plan

Install the policy in permissive mode before running through test cases that involve the SSH service. Check that exercising the test cases do not

> create any policy violations.

Author: Yep, added this to the RFD

    - The location of the PAM module will be configurable
- TCP port forwarding
    - The `teleport_ssh_service_networking` domain will be allowed to listen to arbitrary ports and connect to arbitrary network addresses
- X11 forwarding
    - The `teleport_ssh_service_networking` domain will be allowed to create and manage X11 sockets
- SFTP support
    - The `teleport_ssh_service_intermediary` domain will be allowed to re-execute itself with `sftp` as the first argument

The SELinux policy will be created as a SELinux Reference Policy (refpolicy), to maximize readability and maintainability.

The main alternative is to use SELinux Common Intermediate Language (CIL) which bridges refpolicies and compiled binary policy files.
CIL is extremely powerful but much more difficult to understand by humans, it's meant for consumption by SELinux tools.

#### Future updates

The SELinux policy will be updated in the future to support new features and maintain compatibility with existing features.
Any changes to the SSH service that result in new files being managed, new network activity (listening on new ports, dialing new addresses etc),

> new binaries being executed, or new Linux syscalls being called will require updates to the SELinux policy.

Author: Honestly that's something I don't have a clear answer for. Ideally we could have some automated testing in a new GHA workflow that would run certain integration or unit tests with the SELinux policy installed and SELinux in enforcing mode, but that will be tricky given that different tests will require different policy configurations. A new policy may need to be installed for different tests, but I should have code in place to not make that too difficult.

What do you think?

> new binaries being executed, or new Linux syscalls being called will require updates to the SELinux policy.

Reviewer 2: I'm pretty concerned about this as well. This requires specific configuration of both the kernel, and the context of the CI runner. Our current CI systems, GHA, gets broken every few months when GH silently makes a change. Even if this works today, I would not expect a CI test for this to work in 6 months or a year, at least as-is.

Our self-hosted runner clusters rely on SELinux for security of the underlying OS itself, doing exactly what this RFD proposes for the runner processes themselves. I believe the permissions needed for a testing job would overlap with the permissions required to bypass the security controls.

In summary, GH-hosted runners will likely not work for this, even if they work today, and our current self-hosted runner architecture won't work either due to the security impact.

There is a solution to this. If we use self-hosted runners, and each job gets it's own VM, without a kubelet or other processes, then the executing job can have all the access to the host/host kernel that it wants. There are [several](https://katacontainers.io/) different [solutions](https://github.com/confidential-containers/cloud-api-adaptor) to this, but implementation would require a separate project. We'll need something like this anyway if we need to start testing distro-specific logic, as this PR proposes.

My recommendation would be that we investigate GH-hosted runners to determine if SELinux policies can even be loaded. If that works, tests can be run on Gh-hosted runners for now, with the understanding that we will likely need to disable/remove the test entirely at some point in the future when GH breaks compatibility. If this doesn't work, Internal Tools will need to implement another solution, which will take quite a bit of time.

> new binaries being executed, or new Linux syscalls being called will require updates to the SELinux policy.

Reviewer 3: We have similar testing problems with managed updates (we must test with specific kernel/systemd versions, with and without SELinux, ...). We decided to use a large ansible playbook spinning AWS VMs and running end2end tests. Because of the cost, speed, and timeout-sensitivity of such tests, they are not running automatically currently but we hope to plug them as smoke tests at the end of the release pipeline or in the cloud promotion pipeline.

Another example of such strategy are the EC2 join method tests that require running on an EC2 VM.

> new binaries being executed, or new Linux syscalls being called will require updates to the SELinux policy.

Reviewer 3: Because of the teleport modularity tests can only provide incomplete coverage. We have many teleport services, each of them accessing different resources. Sometimes the same service might have different behaviours based on its configuration (e.g. eBPF tracing, which teleport backend you use, ...) or even based on the cluster configuration (session recording mode: node/proxy). I'm afraid we will have a hard time obtaining a decent guarantees that we are not breaking anything.

> new binaries being executed, or new Linux syscalls being called will require updates to the SELinux policy.

Reviewer 2: > we hope to plug them as smoke tests at the end of the release pipeline or in the cloud promotion pipeline

We could technically do this (for auto updates or selinux testing) but I think that this is highly undesirable for both us and customers. Because they run after a release goes out, we're still sending (potentially) broken code to customers, and just hoping that we can both catch and fix the problem before customers are impacted. This leads to "drop everything", "bandaid" fixes, which prioritize a one-off fix over code quality/long-term fixes. In turn this leads to more regressions, resulting in a positive feedback loop that deteriorates product quality.

This also makes one of our most time consuming and brittle processes more time consuming and brittle. OS package publishing, where smoke tests currently reside, is [running at nearly 100% capacity now](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport.e/actions/workflows/deploy-packages.yaml). This is tangibly [impacting both Internal Tools and devs](https://gravitational.slack.com/archives/C0351AUPJ8K/p1742574837202439), making releases are taking longer and longer, [causing release failures, and adding risk of a release outage](https://gravitational.slack.com/archives/C0DF0TPMY/p1742557399758559).

Lastly, deploying temporarily infra via a release pipeline inevitably ends up leaving infra behind. Internal tools has to go in every week or two to cleanup EC2 instances left behind from pipelines jobs that get cancelled, and fail to clean themselves up. This adds more toil for us, and a larger surface area for malicious actors.

IMO adding smoke tests should be a last resort, and are an indicator that something else is wrong (development processes, system coupling, team capacity, etc.). If we can shift this left at all, then we should.

### Installation and updating

The policy source will be embedded in future Teleport agent binaries.

> A `selinux` subcommand will be added to Teleport agent binaries to allow users to install and configure the SELinux policy. This subcommand

Author: Good idea, added that to RFD

> will will use the Teleport agent configuration file to determine how to configure some of the tunable SELinux policy contexts, such as port

Author: Thanks

not installed, the subcommand will extract the embedded policy and use `checkmodule`, `semodule_package`, and `semodule` to compile and install the policy.

Installation scripts and the `teleport-update` tool will be updated to install and configure the SELinux policy with the `selinux` subcommand.

SELinux has 3 modes, disabled, permissive (policy violations are only logged) and enforcing (attempts to violate the policy are denied).
The SELinux mode will not be modified by the `selinux` subcommand, users will be responsible for enabling SELinux if they so choose.

### Compliance

To ensure the SSH agent SELinux policy is installed and SELinux is configured to enforce it, a `--selinux` flag will be added to the `teleport start` subcommand
of Teleport agents. If the SELinux policy is not installed or SELinux is not present and in enforcing mode and `--selinux` is passed, the Teleport agent
will exit with an error.

Additionally since the SSH service is the only Teleport agent service that will be initially supported by the policy, if the `--selinux` flag is passed

> and the Teleport agent does not have the SSH service enabled, or at least one other Teleport service is enabled then the Teleport agent will exit with an error.

Author: I added some details to this in the RFD, I think we do a best effort check here. We check the policy file that Teleport manages, but we don't check every other installed policy just in case they enforce additional rules on Teleport.

state: draft
---

# RFD 0194 - Official SELinux Policy for Teleport SSH Agents

## Required Approvers

- Engineering: (@r0mant && @rosstimothy)
- Security: Doyensec

## What

This RFD proposes an official SELinux policy for Teleport SSH agents. The policy will enforce that minimal permissions are given to SSH agents,
and that security boundaries between the main server process and child session processes are respected.

The policy will be bundled in Teleport agent binaries and a new subcommand will be added to Teleport agents that will allow installation and configuration of the policy.

## Why

Teleport is often deployed in environments with strict security requirements. SELinux provides a way to enforce fine-grained access controls, which
can help prevent privilege escalation and lateral movement, provide peace of mind, and comply with security standards. As agents are the most widely
deployed component of Teleport, it is important to ensure that they are secure and compliant.

Only SSH agents are initially in scope for this proposal as a starting point, but the SELinux policy may be extended to other components of Teleport in the future.

> 

Author: Done

`teleport_ssh_service_intermediary`, `teleport_ssh_service_session`, and `teleport_ssh_service_networking` respectively.

Configurable file and port contexts will be created for the `teleport_ssh_service` domain, and configurable file contexts
will be created for the `teleport_ssh_service_intermediary` domain to allow those processes to bind to the necessary ports and read and write
to the necessary files, depending on the SSH agent configuration. At a minimum this will allow the `teleport_ssh_service` domain to bind to
the configured SSH port and read and write to the data directory, and dial the configured Teleport Proxy and Auth servers. 

There are a few optional features that can be enabled or disabled on SSH agents, the first version of the policy will ensure necessary permissions
for all optional features are allowed to simplify development and deployment.

These include:

- Reading `~/.tsh/environment` on the server before creating a session
    - The `teleport_ssh_service_intermediary` domain will be allowed to read `.tsh/environment` in all users' home directories
- Creation of host users and groups

>     - The `teleport_ssh_service` domain will be allowed to call necessary binaries such as `useradd`, `usermod` and `groupadd`

Reviewer 2: Not sure if there is a way around it (at least with selinux alone), but this provides an escape hatch if the process is assumed to be compromised. If `useradd` or `usermod` can be called by the process, then the process can reconfigure the user's shell, causing a different process to run when a user logs in (via SSH or any other means).

Author: Yeah I don't easily know of a simple way to enforce this, as SELinux doesn't allow filtering based off of arguments to a process. I can basically only control what permissions to what files (almost everything is a file in Linux) are allowed if you boil it down. That's a good thought though. There are a couple of other permissions, capabilities mainly that I also have to allow for Teleport to function correctly that could also be abused as well, no real way around that.

- Enhanced session recording with BPF
   - The `teleport_ssh_service` domain will be allowed to create and manage BPF ring buffers, and load BPF programs
- Creation of PAM contexts
    - The `teleport_ssh_service_intermediary` domain will be allowed to `dlopen` the PAM module and call it's exported functions
    - The location of the PAM module will be configurable
- TCP port forwarding
    - The `teleport_ssh_service_networking` domain will be allowed to listen to arbitrary ports and connect to arbitrary network addresses
- X11 forwarding
    - The `teleport_ssh_service_networking` domain will be allowed to create and manage X11 sockets
- SFTP support

>     - The `teleport_ssh_service_intermediary` domain will be allowed to re-execute itself with `sftp` as the first argument

Reviewer 4: That's a lot, can we maybe leave less common features support out of initial scope?

Author: Updated to only include what some of our clients specifically asked for

The SELinux policy will be created as a SELinux Reference Policy (refpolicy), to maximize readability and maintainability.

The main alternative is to use SELinux Common Intermediate Language (CIL) which bridges refpolicies and compiled binary policy files.
CIL is extremely powerful but much more difficult to understand by humans, it's meant for consumption by SELinux tools.

#### Future updates

The SELinux policy will be updated in the future to support new features and maintain compatibility with existing features.
Any changes to the SSH service that result in new files being managed, new network activity (listening on new ports, dialing new addresses etc),

> new binaries being executed, or new Linux syscalls being called will require updates to the SELinux policy.

Reviewer 2: IMO Teleport should have a command that collects relevant audit log information, and I think that this should be a part of the initial release. This could be pretty simple - something logically along the lines of `cat /var/log/audit/audit.log | grep AVC | grep teleport > /var/run/teleport/support.log`. SELinux policy issues can be a pain to track down, especially without audit logs. This would help catch regressions, and add support in debugging problems.

Passing this through `audit2why` or `audit2allow` could help as well, _if_ they are available on client systems.

Reviewer 3: +1 for the troublehsooting command as we'll receive support requests about this, or will have to rule out SELinux when debugging issues on SELinux-enforcing systems. Being able to easily extract traces saves a lot of time for customers, the support frontline, and core engineers.

Author: That's a good idea, and shouldn't be hard to add if we're just wrapping other commands.

### Installation and updating

The policy source will be embedded in future Teleport agent binaries.

A `selinux` subcommand will be added to Teleport agent binaries to allow users to install and configure the SELinux policy. This subcommand
will use the Teleport agent configuration file to determine how to configure some of the tunable SELinux policy contexts, such as port

> numbers, file paths, and booleans using the `semanage` tool.

Reviewer 2: This will add an external dependency to Teleport, that users will need installed on their machine if they want to use this feature. How will this be handled?

Author: You mean SELinux? This policy will be entirely opt in, if users don't have SELinux on their hosts that's out of scope for us to try to configure

The policy will allow the Teleport agent processes with the `selinux` subcommand only to create or update its SELinux policy. This will be enforced by
creating a `teleport_selinux_management` domain, which will not be allowed to be a parent of any other Teleport related domain. Otherwise an attacker could
use the SSH service to run the `selinux` subcommand and potentially modify the policy.

If the SSH service itself was allowed to manage its own SELinux policy, an attacker that compromised the SSH service could modify the policy to
be more permissive, defeating the point of the policy in the first place.

If SELinux is not present on the host, the subcommand will tell the user this and exit. If SELinux is present but the Teleport agent policy is
not installed, the subcommand will extract the embedded policy and use `checkmodule`, `semodule_package`, and `semodule` to compile and install the policy.

> Installation scripts and the `teleport-update` tool will be updated to install and configure the SELinux policy with the `selinux` subcommand.

Author: Nope, I specifically mention that we won't modify the SELinux mode in the Installation section for this reason

SELinux has 3 modes, disabled, permissive (policy violations are only logged) and enforcing (attempts to violate the policy are denied).
The SELinux mode will not be modified by the `selinux` subcommand, users will be responsible for enabling SELinux if they so choose.

The `selinux` subcommand will have a `--dry-run` flag that will print what actions it would need to take to manage the policy if run normally and
print the policy that would be installed based on the provided Teleport agent configuration file.

### Compliance

To ensure the SSH agent SELinux policy is installed and SELinux is configured to enforce it, a `--selinux` flag will be added to the `teleport start` subcommand

> of Teleport agents. If the SELinux policy is not installed or SELinux is not present and in enforcing mode and `--selinux` is passed, the Teleport agent

Reviewer 4: Need a separate section explaining how we will interact with existing SELinux policies that may already be in place. In that case I think we should not override and users should be able to opt-out of our builtin one.

Author: Added a note on this. I don't think it's feasible to inspect every installed policy to see if they interact with Teleport at all, so we'll just have to do a best effort check.

will exit with an error.

Additionally since the SSH service is the only Teleport agent service that will be initially supported by the policy, if the `--selinux` flag is passed
and the Teleport agent does not have the SSH service enabled, or at least one other Teleport service is enabled then the Teleport agent will exit with an error.
Additionally if there is a SELinux policy for Teleport agents installed but it does not match the policy that would be generated with the version of the
policy embedded in the Teleport agent and the Teleport agent's configuration file it will notify the user and exit with an error. Users will then have to
run the `selinux` subcommand to update the SELinux policy.

### Host support

> Initially RHEL based distributions, primarily RHEL 7 and 8, and Rocky Linux 8 will be supported.

Reviewer 3: Not a blocker but it's getting quite hard to test on Centos/RHEL 7. As the distro turned EOL, all AMIs got pulled from AWS (there's a single RHEL7 amd64 image left).

> Other distributions such as Debian based distributions may be supported in the future.

Reviewer 2: See above conversation about CI testing. Adding tests for specific distros that are kernel-dependent will not be easy to do.

### Security

This policy when installed and SELinux is set to the enforcing mode will only increase the security of Teleport SSH agents. The authenticity of

> the policies contained in release assets served by the download server is out of scope for this RFD.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the policies contained in release assets served by release channels is out of scope for this RFD.
```

### Test plan

Install the policy in permissive mode before running through test cases that involve the SSH service. Check that exercising the test cases do not
create any policy violations.

> Specifically, the following SSH service features will be tested with the policy installed:

Reviewer 2: This should also test that some actions are blocked, such as running other commands.

creating a `teleport_selinux_management` domain, which will not be allowed to be a parent of any other Teleport related domain. Otherwise an attacker could
use the SSH service to run the `selinux` subcommand and potentially modify the policy.

If the SSH service itself was allowed to manage its own SELinux policy, an attacker that compromised the SSH service could modify the policy to
be more permissive, defeating the point of the policy in the first place.

If SELinux is not present on the host, the subcommand will tell the user this and exit. If SELinux is present but the Teleport agent policy is
not installed, the subcommand will extract the embedded policy and use `checkmodule`, `semodule_package`, and `semodule` to compile and install the policy.

Installation scripts and the `teleport-update` tool will be updated to install and configure the SELinux policy with the `selinux` subcommand.

SELinux has 3 modes, disabled, permissive (policy violations are only logged) and enforcing (attempts to violate the policy are denied).
The SELinux mode will not be modified by the `selinux` subcommand, users will be responsible for enabling SELinux if they so choose.

> The `selinux` subcommand will have a `--dry-run` flag that will print what actions it would need to take to manage the policy if run normally and

Reviewer 5: What about a rollback mechanism in case of policy issues? The `--dry-run` is a nice initial safeguard, but it's still possible that some issues won't be caught.

Once SELinux is enabled, a bad policy update could completely break the Teleport SSH Service. While administrators can switch SELinux to permissive mode or manually modify the policy, a dedicated rollback mechanism would reduce downtime and help restore a valid configuration in large-scale production environments.

The older policy might not be compatible with the current Teleport binary, therefore the only bullet-proof rollback method would be downgrading Teleport itself. Should that be outlined in the RFD?

Author: This will be out of scope initially, but installing the module with `teleport-update` will support rollbacks, I'll update the RFD to mention this.
